CHSM GENERAL COMMERCIAL LICENSE
Version 5, August 2007

Copyright (C) 2005-2018 Paul J. Lucas

Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this license
document, but changing it is not allowed.


  1. License.  Subject to the terms of this License, Paul J. Lucas ("Licensor")
hereby grants you ("Licensee") a limited, non-exclusive right to use, copy,
modify, create derivative works, sublicense, and distribute the Concurrent
Hierarchical State Machine software ("CHSM").

This License is only for version _______ of CHSM and all subsequent versions
that are made publicly available within one year from the date this License is
entered into by the parties.

You may use this version of this License or, at your option, any later version.

  2. Permitted Uses and Restrictions.  This License allows you to incorporate
CHSM into software developed by you ("your software") as follows:

	a) You may make modifications to CHSM source code and may keep those
	   modifications proprietary.

	b) You may use CHSM in any way, in whole or in part, with or without
	   modifications, as part of your software.

	c) Your software may not in any way enable a user to design, specify,
	   construct, modify, or simulate any form of finite state automata.

	d) You may distribute CHSM, in whole or in part, with or without
	   modifications, in binary form, by any means, with your software.

	e) You may license your software, which may include CHSM, in whole or
	   in part, with or without modifications, in binary form, under its
	   own license so long as it does not conflict with this license.

	f) You may distribute CHSM in its entirety, or your modifications, or
	   both, by any means, in source form; however, CHSM or your
	   modifications so distributed shall be under the terms of the GNU
	   General Public License.

	g) All copyright notices displayed by or in documentation for your
	   software must include the following notice:

		CHSM (C) 1996-2018  Paul J. Lucas.  All rights reserved.

	   You may translate the above notice into another language or to
	   adhere to local legal requirements where displayed.

	h) You may offer warranty protection for your software that may include
	   CHSM, in whole or in part, with or without modifications.

You may not use, copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute CHSM except as
expressly provided under this License.  Any attempt otherwise to use, copy,
modify, sublicense, or distribute CHSM is void, and will automatically
terminate your rights under this License.

  3. Disclaimer of Warranty.  You expressly acknowledge and agree that use of
CHSM is at your sole risk.  CHSM is provided "AS IS" and without warranty of
any kind and Licensor EXPRESSLY DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES AND/OR CONDITIONS,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
AND/OR CONDITIONS OF MERCHANTABILITY OR SATISFACTORY QUALITY AND FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT OF THIRD PARTY RIGHTS.  LICENSOR DOES
NOT WARRANT THAT THE FUNCTIONS CONTAINED IN CHSM WILL MEET YOUR REQUIREMENTS,
OR THAT THE OPERATION OF CHSM WILL BE UNINTERRUPTED OR ERROR-FREE, OR THAT
DEFECTS IN CHSM WILL BE CORRECTED.  FURTHERMORE, LICENSOR DOES NOT WARRANT OR
MAKE ANY REPRESENTATIONS REGARDING THE USE OR THE RESULTS OF THE USE OF CHSM OR
RELATED DOCUMENTATION IN TERMS OF THEIR CORRECTNESS, ACCURACY, RELIABILITY, OR
OTHERWISE.  NO ORAL OR WRITTEN INFORMATION OR ADVICE GIVEN BY LICENSOR SHALL
CREATE A WARRANTY OR IN ANY WAY INCREASE THE SCOPE OF THIS WARRANTY.  SOME
JURISDICTIONS DO NOT ALLOW THE EXCLUSION OF IMPLIED WARRANTIES, SO THE ABOVE
EXCLUSION MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU.

  4. Limitation of Liability.  UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCES, INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE,
SHALL LICENSOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL
DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF OR RELATING TO THIS LICENSE.  SOME JURISDICTIONS DO NOT
ALLOW THE LIMITATION OF INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES SO THIS LIMITATION
MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU. In no event shall Licensor's total liability to you for
all damages exceed the amount you paid for the right to use this License.

  5. Controlling Law and Severability.  This License shall be governed by the
laws of the United States and the State of California.  If for any reason a
court of competent jurisdiction finds any provision, or portion thereof, to be
unenforceable, the remainder of this License shall continue in full force and
effect.

  6. Complete Agreement.  This License constitutes the entire agreement between
the parties with respect to the use of CHSM and supersedes all prior or
contemporaneous understandings regarding such subject matter.  No amendment to
or modification of this License will be binding unless in writing and signed by
Licensor.


END OF LICENSE



______________________________	____________
Licensee			Date



______________________________	____________
Paul J. Lucas			Date
