'\" t
.\"     CHSM Language System
.\"     chsm-c++.4 -- Language description manual page
.\"
.\"     Copyright (C) 1996-2018  Paul J. Lucas & Fabio Riccardi
.\"
.\"     This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"     
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"     
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" define code-start macro
.de cS
.if !'\\$1'0' .sp
.nf
.RS 5
.ft CW
..
.\" define code-end macro
.de cE
.ft 1
.RE
.fi
.if !'\\$1'0' .sp
..
.\" define grammar-start macro
.de gS
.PP
.RS 5
.ft I
.vs 11pt
..
.\" define grammar-end macro
.de gE
.vs
.RE
.ft 1
.PP
..
.\" ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TH \f3CHSM-C++\fP 4 "June 13, 2018" "CHSM" "CHSM Language System"
.SH "NAME"
CHSM-C++ \- Concurrent, Hierarchical, Finite State Machine specification language for C++
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.nf
.I declarations
\f(CW%%\fP
.I description
\f(CW%%\fP
.I user-code
.fi
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
The CHSM specification language is a text-based means for specifying
.IR statecharts .
A statechart is graphical formalism for specifying
concurrent, hierarchical, finite state machines.
Such machines are useful for developing reactive systems.
Additionally, arbitrary C++ code can be integrated in a manner similar
to the way
.BR yacc (1)
allows integration of arbitrary C code.
.SH "LEXICAL CONVENTIONS"
.SS "File Format"
A CHSM description file is an ordinary text file with three sections:
declarations, description, and user-code.
The sections are separated by the \f(CW%%\fP token
that must be at the beginning of a line.
The declarations and user-code sections may be empty;
if the user-code section is empty,
then the trailing \f(CW%%\fP may be omitted.
If present, the declarations and user-code sections are passed through,
untouched, to the underlying C++ compiler.
The description file is otherwise free-format.
The smallest legal CHSM description file is:
.cS
%%
chsm smallest is { }
.cE
The declarations section is meant to contain
any C++ declarations or definitions, or preprocessor directives
needed to compile the resultant C++ code.
.SS "Comments"
Both \f(CW/* ... */\fP and \f(CW//\fP comments may be used anywhere
in the CHSM description file where whitespace is legal.
.SS "Identifiers"
Identifiers follow the same rules for what constitutes a valid identifier
in C++.
.SS "Keywords"
The following identifiers are reserved for use as keywords
and may not be used otherwise:
.PP
.RS 5
.ft CW
.TS
tab( ) ;
l l l l l l .
chsm cluster deep enter event exit
history in is set state upon
.TE
.RE
.ft 1
.PP
Additionally, all C++ keywords are also reserved.
.PP
The following characters and character-combinations
are used as punctuation or operators:
.PP
.RS 5
.ft CW
.TS
tab( ) ;
l l l l l l l l l l .
, ; -> . :: %% %{ %} $
[ ] ( ) { } < > * &
.TE
.RE
.ft 1
.PP
.SH "BASIC CONCEPTS"
.SS "Scope"
There are four kinds of scope: global, CHSM, local, and code-block.
.PP
.RS 5
.I "Global"
scope exists in the declarations and user-code sections.
The only thing injected into the global scope from the description section
is the name of the CHSM.
.PP
.I "CHSM"
scope exists inside the body of the CHSM description.
State and event names are local to CHSM scope.
.PP
.I "Local"
scope exists only within clusters and sets
and only for child-state identifiers.
One identifier may be hidden by another due to a child-state declaration
with an equal name in a lexically-enclosed scope.
Such an identifier can still be referenced by using one of the scope-resolution
operators (see STATE NAMES).
.PP
.I "Code-block"
scope exists only within \f(CW%{ %}\fP pairs.
It is treated exactly like a C++ function.
All state names and all event names are in the scope of all blocks.
Code blocks follow the ``C++ rewriting rule'' for \f(CWinline\fP functions,
although they are not \f(CWinline\fP functions.
.RE
.SS "Initialization"
A CHSM is fully initialized upon definition.
States are not automatically entered, however;
nor are they automatically exited upon destruction.
.cS
%%
chsm my_machine is {
    // ...
}

%%
int main() {
    my_machine m;   // fully initialized and ready for use
    m.enter();      // enter initial states
    // ...
    m.exit();       // exit all states
}
.cE 0
.SS "Types"
There are five fundamental types: machine, state, cluster, set, and event;
each is an instance of the
.BR CHSM::machine ,
.BR CHSM::state ,
.BR CHSM::cluster ,
.BR CHSM::set ,
or
.B CHSM::event
class, respectively.
.SH "MACHINE DESCRIPTIONS"
Machine descriptions have the form:
.gS
.TS
tab(!) ;
l l .
machine-desc:!\f(CWchsm\fP state-decl \f3\s+2[\s-2\fP\f(CW(\fPparam-list\f(CW)\fP\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP \f3\s+2[\s-2\fPhistory-decl\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP \f3\s+2[\s-2\fPmachine-block\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP parent-body

state-decl:!\f3\s+2[\s-2\fP\f(CW<\fPclass-name\f(CW>\fP\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP identifier

param-list:!C++-function-formal-argument-declaration-list

history-decl:!\f3\s+3[\s-2\fP\f(CWdeep\fP\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP \f(CWhistory\fP

machine-block:!\f(CW{\fP \f3\s+2[\s-2\fPenter-exit-blocks\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP \f(CW}\fP

parent-body:!\f(CWis {\fP \f3\s+2[\s-2\fPdescription-list\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP \f(CW}\fP

description-list:!description \f3\s+2[\s-2\fPdescription-list\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP

description:!state-desc
!cluster-desc
!set-desc
!event-desc
.TE
.gE
If \f(CW<\f2class-name\f(CW>\f1 is given as part of
.IR state-decl ,
said class must have been derived (directly or indirectly)
from \f(CWCHSM::machine\fP.
.PP
States declared in
.I description-list
are child states of an implicit cluster named \f(CWroot\fP.
Declaring a CHSM with \f(CWhistory\fP gives the \f(CWroot\fP cluster a history.
See
.B CHSM::cluster
for more information.
.SS "Parameter Lists"
Parameter lists are based on C++ function
.I formal
argument declarations
(the grammar for which is specified in the ANSI/ISO C++ standard);
hence, they may not be abstract:
.cS
chsm my_machine( int ) is {         // illegal: abstract declaration
chsm my_machine( int x ) is {       // legal
.cE
Additionally, they may not have default values:
.cS
chsm my_machine( int x = 0 ) is {   // illegal: default value
.cE
See
.B CHSM::machine
for more information.
.SS "Enter-Exit-Blocks"
.I Enter-exit-blocks
are arbitrary C++ code
executed upon CHSM or state entrances and/or exits.
They have the form:
.gS
.TS
tab(!) ;
l l .
enter-exit-blocks:!enter-exit-block \f3\s+2[\s-2\fPenter-exit-block\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP

enter-exit-block:!\f(CWupon\fP enter-exit-selector \f(CW%{\fP C++-statement-list \f(CW%}\fP

enter-exit-selector:!\f(CWenter\fP
!\f(CWexit\fP
.TE
.gE
For example:
.cS
state s {
    upon enter %{
        cout << "hello, world\\n";
    %}
    upon exit %{
        cout << "goodbye, world\\n";
    %}
}
.cE
.I Enter-exit-blocks
are optional.
At most one of each can be specified
and they must precede all transition specifications.
They can be specified in either order with no semantic difference.
.PP
Within
.IR C++-statement-list ,
the variables \f(CWevent\fP and \f(CWstate\fP are available
and are references to the event that triggered the transition
and enclosing state, respectively:
.cS
    upon enter %{
        if ( event == alpha )
            // ...
    %}
.cE
.SH "STATE DESCRIPTIONS"
Plain-state descriptions have the form:
.gS
.TS
tab(!) ;
l l .
state-desc:!\f(CWstate\fP state-decl state-def

state-def:!state-body
!\f(CW;\fP

state-body:!\f(CW{\fP \f3\s+2[\s-2\fPenter-exit-blocks\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP \f3\s+2[\s-2\fPtransition-list\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP \f(CW}\fP
.TE
.gE
If \f(CW<\f2class-name\f(CW>\f1 is given as part of
.IR state-decl ,
said class must have been derived (directly or indirectly)
from \f(CWCHSM::state\fP.
See
.B CHSM::state
for more information.
.PP
A
.I state-def
of just a semicolon functions as a ``sink'';
such a state can be ``escaped'' from only by means of a transition from its
parent state:
.cS
cluster display( normal, /* ... */, error ) {
    reset -> display;   // escapes "sink"
} is {
    state normal {
        disaster -> error;
    }
    state error;        // "sink"
}
.cE
.SH "CLUSTER DESCRIPTIONS"
Cluster descriptions have the form:
.gS
.TS
tab(!) ;
l l .
cluster-desc:!\f(CWcluster\fP state-decl \f(CW(\fPchild-list\f(CW)\fP \f3\s+2[\s-2\fPhistory-decl\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP \f3\s+2[\s-2\fPstate-body\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP parent-body

child-list:!child-name \f3\s+2[\s-2\fP\f(CW,\fP child-list\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP

child-name:!identifier
.TE
.gE
The
.I child-list
declares the names (only) of all child states;
all child states must be declared:
.cS
cluster c(x,y) is {
    state x;
    state y;
    state z;            // error: undeclared child
}
.cE
The order in which child states are declared
need not match the order in which they are defined.
The first child-state
.B defined
in the
.I description-list
is the default child-state.
.PP
See
.B CHSM::cluster
for information about \f(CWhistory\fP.
.SH "SET DESCRIPTIONS"
Set descriptions have the form:
.gS
.TS
tab(!) ;
l l .
set-desc:!\f(CWset\fP state-decl \f(CW(\fPchild-list\f(CW)\fP \f3\s+2[\s-2\fPstate-body\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP parent-body
.TE
.gE
See
.B CHSM::set
for more information.
.SH "EVENT DESCRIPTIONS"
Event descriptions have the form:
.gS
.TS
tab(!) ;
l l .
event-desc:!\f(CWevent\fP \f3\s+2[\s-2\fP\f(CW<\fPevent-name\f(CW>\fP\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP identifier \f3\s+2[\s-2\fP\f(CW(\fP\f3\s+2[\s-2\fPparam-list\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP\f(CW)\fP\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP \f3\s+2[\s-2\fPprecondition\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP \f(CW;\fP
.TE
.gE
Parameter declarations for events are the same as those for machine
descriptions.
If \f(CW<\f2event-name\f(CW>\f1 is given, said event is a
.IR "base event" .
See
.B CHSM::event
for more information.
.SS "Parameter Lists"
If an event has been declared with parameters,
they can be accessed via the C++ \f(CWoperator\->\fP
(not to be confused with the CHSM transition operator \f(CW\->\fP):
.cS
event say( char const *message );

state s {
    say -> t %{
        cout << say->message << endl;
    %};
}
.cE
Additionally, all parameters inherited from base events, if any,
are also accessible via \f(CWoperator\->\fP:
.cS
event<say> quote( char const *author );

state s {
    quote -> t %{
        cout << quote->message
             << "\\n-- " << quote->author << endl;
    %};
}
.cE
.SS "Preconditions"
A
.I precondition
for an event is arbitrary C++ code that determines
whether conditions are right for an event to be allowed to take place.
Preconditions have the form:
.gS
.TS
tab(!) ;
l l .
precondition:!\f(CW[\fP C++-expression \f(CW]\fP
!\f(CW%{\fP C++-statement-list \f(CW%}\fP
.TE
.gE
For example:
.cS
event mouse( int x, int y ) [ x >= 0 && y >= 0 ];
.cE
would discard all \f(CWmouse\fP events when either coordinate is negative.
If C++ code for a precondition is more complicated than
a simple expression can easily accommodate,
then a function can be specified instead:
.cS
event login( int pin ) %{
    if ( pin == atm_card.pin )
        return true;
    display( "INCORRECT PIN" );
    return false;
%};
.cE
Precondition functions must use the C++ \f(CWreturn\fP statement explicitly
to return an expression convertible to \f(CWbool\fP.
In either form,
an event need not have parameters in order to have a precondition
(which could test some global data, for example).
Preconditions are considered \f(CWconst\fP member functions of the CHSM.
.SH "STATE NAMES"
When referring to state names,
they have the form:
.gS
.TS
tab(!) ;
l l .
state-name-ref:!\f3\s+2[\s-2\fPscope-selector\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP identifier-list

scope-selector:!\f(CW::\fP
!dots

dots:!\f(CW.\fP\f3\s+2[\s-2\fPdots\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP

identifier-list:!identifier \f3\s+2[\s-2\fP\f(CW.\fPidentifier-list\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP
.TE
.gE
In the following CHSM description:
.cS
cluster p(q,s) is {
    cluster q(s) is {
        state s {
            alpha -> s;         // goes to q's s
            gamma -> p.s;       // goes to p's s
        }
    }
    state s;
}
.cE
the reference to state
.I s
in the transition on
.I alpha
goes to
.IR q 's
child-state
.IR s .
To go to
.IR p 's
child-state
.IR s ,
i.e., a non-local state-name,
the scope of the desired state can be specified.
There are three ways to do this.
The most straight-forward way
is to precede the state name by that of its parent-state's name and a period,
as was done in the transition on
.IR gamma .
.PP
In the following CHSM description, however:
.cS
cluster p(p,s) is {
    cluster p(q,s) is {
        cluster q(s) is {
            state s {
                alpha -> p.s;   // goes to intermediate p's s
                gamma -> ::p.s; // goes to outermost p's s
            }
        }
        state s;
    }
    state s;
}
.cE
that solution would not work due to the introduction of the new, intermediate
cluster
.IR p .
To go to the outermost
.IR p 's
child-state
.IR s ,
precede the state name by a double-colon,
as was done in the transition on
.IR gamma .
.PP
For both examples,
the second form of referring to state-names could have been used.
For example:
.cS
            gamma -> .s;        // goes to p's s
.cE
could have been used in the first example and:
.cS
            gamma -> ..s;       // goes to outermost p's s
.cE
could have been used in the second
where each leading period ``backs up'' a scope.
.PP
To refer to a state name in global scope,
it must be fully-qualified:
.cS
%%
chsm my_machine is {
    cluster c(s) is {
        state s { /* ... */ }
    }
}

%%
int main() {
    my_machine m;
    // ...
    if ( m.c.s.active() )   // must use fully-qualified name
        // ...
}
.cE
.SH "EVENT NAMES"
When referring to events, they have the form:
.gS
.TS
tab(!) ;
l l .
event-ref:!event-name
!\f(CWenter(\fPstate-name\f(CW)\fP
!\f(CWexit(\fPstate-name\f(CW)\fP

event-name:!identifier
.TE
.gE
An
.I event-name
is for a user event; the others are for
.I enter/exit
events.
.I Enter/exit
events are implicitly broadcast upon the entering/exiting
of states;
other states can make transitions on these events like just like user events:
.cS
enter(s) -> t;
.cE 0
.SS "Equality"
There are the global operators \f(CW==\fP and \f(CW!=\fP
that test whether two events are equal or not.
For example:
.cS
    alpha, beta -> s %{
        if ( event == alpha )
            // ...
    %};
.cE
or perhaps:
.cS
    gamma, delta, epsilon -> s %{
        if ( event != gamma )
            // ...
    %};
.cE
Because there is a single instance of each event per CHSM,
these functions test
.I identity
rather than equality;
hence two events of the same name from different instances of a CHSM
will not compare equal.
.SH "TRANSITION LISTS"
Transition lists have the form:
.gS
.TS
tab(!) ;
l l .
transition-list:!transition \f3\s+2[\s-2\fPtransition-list\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP

transition:!event-condition-list target-action

event-condition-list:!event-condition \f3\s+2[\s-2\fP\f(CW,\fP event-condition-list\f3\s+2]\s-2\fP

event-condition:!event-ref \f3\s+2[\s-2\fP \f(CW[\fPcondition\f(CW]\fP \f3\s+2]\s-2\fP

condition:!C++-expression

target-action:!\f(CW->\fP target-state \f3\s+2[\s-2\fP \f(CW%{\fP C++-statement-list \f(CW%}\fP \f3\s+2]\s-2\fP
!\f(CW%{\fP C++-statement-list \f(CW%}\fP

target-state:!state-name-ref
!\f(CW[\fP target-expression \f(CW]\fP

target-expression:!C++-expression
.TE
.gE
.SS "Conditions"
A
.I condition
is any valid C++ expression
that yields a value convertible to \f(CWbool\fP.
For example:
.cS
state s {
    alpha[ counter == 0 ] -> t;
}
.cE
The transition occurs only if the condition evaluates to true.
An event in an
.I event-condition
without an explicit (user-specified) condition
has an implicit (default) condition that always evaluates to true.
.PP
A transition is taken if any one of the events in an
.I event-condition-list
occurs and its condition,
if any, is true;
hence the commas can be read as ``or.''
.SS "Actions"
An
.I action
is a sequence of zero or more valid C++ statements
executed only if the transition occurs.
For example:
.cS
    beta -> t %{ ++counter; %};
.cE
Within an action, the variable \f(CWevent\fP is available
and is a reference to the event that triggered the transition:
.cS
    alpha, beta -> t %{
        if ( event == alpha )
            // ...
    %};
.cE 0
.SS "Internal Transitions"
An
.I internal-transition
merely performs a statement-list upon an event;
no ``transition'' actually takes place.
For example:
.cS
state s {
    alpha %{            // internal transition
        // ...
    %};
}
.cE
says that, on the occurrence of the event
.I alpha
(or any event derived from
.IR alpha ),
execute the C++ code in the following block,
but do not exit state
.I s
nor transition in any way.
Compare that with the ``self transition'' of:
.cS
state s {
    alpha -> s %{       // self transition
        // ...
    %};
}
.cE
that exits
.IR s ,
broadcasts
.IR exit(s) ,
reenters
.IR s ,
broadcasts
.IR enter(s) ,
and performs transitions as a result of said broadcasts, if any.
Internal transitions can be used as an optimization where the full-blown
mechanics of regular transitions are not needed.
The term ``internal transition'' is a poor one,
but it's the term in common use.
.SS "Dominance"
When a state has more than one transition with a condition
(either explicit or implicit)
that evaluates to true,
the one declared first
.IR dominates :
.cS
state x {
    alpha -> y;     // this transition dominates...
    alpha -> z;     // ...over this one
}
.cE
This is more useful when the first transition has an explicit condition
so it functions like an ``if-else'':
.cS
    alpha[ c ] -> y;    // if ( c == true ) ...
    alpha -> z;         // else ...
.cE
Additionally,
when a parent- and child-state both have such a transition,
the parent-state's dominates:
.cS
cluster c(x) {
    alpha -> y;         // this transition dominates...
} is {
    state x {
        alpha -> y;     // ...over this one
    }
}
.cE
Note that internal transitions will
.I not
dominate over others on the same event:
.cS
cluster c(x) {
    alpha %{ /* ... */ %};  // this transition will NOT dominate...
} is {
    state x {
        alpha -> y;         // ...over this one
    }
}
state y;
.cE
because the internal transition doesn't really ``transition,''
hence there is no real transition to dominate.
.SS "Target Expressions"
A
.I target-expression
is any valid C++ expression that yields a value convertible to
\f(CWCHSM::state*\fP.
The value of the expression determines the state to transition to
at run-time rather than compile-time.
For example:
.cS
state s {
    alpha -> [ &t ];
}
state t;
.cE
If the expression evaluates to null, the transition is aborted.
Note that returning a state that results in an illegal transition
(such as a child state of a set transitioning to a sibling)
results in undefined behavior.
.PP
Within a target-expression, the variable \f(CWevent\fP is available
and is a reference to the event that triggered the transition:
.cS
    alpha, beta -> [ f( event ) ];
.cE
.SH "SPECIAL CONSTRUCTS"
Within all C++ code for
enter-exit-blocks, preconditions, conditions, and actions,
the following \f(CW$\fP constructs can be used:
.SS "\f(CW${\f2state-name\fP}\fP"
Refers to the state
.IR state-name :
.cS
chsm my_machine is {
    cluster c(s,t) is {
        state<my_state> s {
            alpha -> t %{
                ${s}.member_function();
            %}
        }
        // ...
    }
}
.cE
If the \f(CW${\f2state-name\fP}\f1 notation were not used,
the fully-qualified state name would need to be used instead:
.cS
                c.s.member_function();
.cE
This notation also permits the scope-resolution operators to be used
inside of it.
.SS "\f(CW$enter(\f2state-name\fP)\f1, \f(CW$exit(\f2state-name\fP)\f1"
Refers to the enter/exit event of
.I state-name
(instead of the C++ library function \f(CWexit()\fP, for example):
.cS
        alpha, exit(s) -> t %{
            if ( event == $exit(s) )
                // ...
        %};
.cE 0
.SS "\f(CW$in(\fP\f2state-name\fP\f(CW)\fP"
Returns \f(CWtrue\fP only if the CHSM is in the state
.IR state-name :
.cS
        alpha[ $in( s ) ] -> t;
.cE
The above is equivalent to:
.cS
        alpha[ ${s}.active() ] -> t;
.cE 0
.SH "THREAD SAFETY"
The CHSM specification language is ``thread-safe''
meaning that multiple threads can broadcast events
to the same machine concurrently.
.PP
However, user-specified code in
enter/exit-blocks,
event preconditions,
transition conditions, target expression, and actions
is not thread-safe unless made so by the user.
.SH "FILES"
.PD 0
.TP 14
.IR source \f(CW.chsmc\fP
CHSM-C++ source file
.TP
.IR source \f(CW.h\fP
generated C++ declaration file
.TP
.IR file \f(CW.cpp\fP
generated C++ definition file
.PD
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR chsmc (1),
.BR CHSM::cluster ,
.BR CHSM::event ,
.BR CHSM::machine ,
.BR CHSM::parent ,
.BR CHSM::set ,
.B CHSM::state
.PP
David Harel, et al.
``On the Formal Semantics of Statecharts.''
.I "Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science,"
IEEE Press, NY, 1987.
pp. 54-64.
.PP
David Harel.
``Statecharts: A Visual Formalism for Complex Systems.''
.I "Science of Computer Programming,"
vol. 8, 1987.
pp. 231-274.
.PP
Paul J. Lucas.
``An Object-Oriented Language System for
Implementing Concurrent, Hierarchical, Finite State Machines.''
.I "M.S. Thesis,"
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1993.
Technical Report: UIUCDCS-R-94-1868.
.SH "AUTHORS"
Paul J. Lucas
.RI < paul@lucasmail.org >
.br
Fabio Riccardi
.RI < fabio.riccardi@mac.com >
.\" vim:set et sw=4 ts=4:
