.\"
.\"     CHSM Language System
.\"     chsm2java.1 -- CHSM-to-Java Compiler manual page
.\"
.\"     Copyright (C) 2004-2013  Paul J. Lucas & Fabio Riccardi
.\"
.\"     This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"     the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\"     (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"     GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"     along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\"     Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\"
.TH \f3chsm2java\f1 1 "January 21, 2010" "CHSM" "CHSM Language System"
.SH NAME
chsm2java \- CHSM-to-Java compiler
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B chsm2java
[
.I options
]
.I "source-file definition-file"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B chsm2java
is the Concurrent Hierarchical Finite State Machine compiler for Java.
.PP
Unless the
.B \-E
option is used,
.BR chsm2java ,
given a CHSM description in
.IR source-file ,
produces a Java source file.
The file is suitable for subsequent compilation with a Java compiler;
however, additional options may need to be given for the compilation to succeed
depending on where the CHSM jar file has been installed.
The
.BR chsmj (1)
driver script is ordinarily configured to supply the necessary options
to the underlying Java compiler;
hence, its use is preferred over using
.B chsm2java
directly.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-E
Send all the generated Java code to standard output
instead of producing the definition file.
.TP
.B \-S
Produce semantic stack debugging information.
(Such information is useful only to developers modifying the CHSM grammar.)
Note:
The software must have been compiled with \f(CWPJL_STACK_DEBUG\f1 defined,
otherwise a warning message is issued and the option is ignored.
.TP
.B \-v
Print the version number of
.B chsm2java
and exit.
.TP
.B \-Y
Turn on
.BR yacc (1)
debugging output.
(Such information is useful only to developers modifying the CHSM grammar.)
Note:
The software must have been compiled with \f(CWYYDEBUG\f1 defined,
otherwise a warning message is issued and the option is ignored.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 14
\f(CWchsm_\f2pid
temporary file
.PD
.SH EXAMPLE
\f(CWchsm2java hello.chsm hello.java\f1
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR chsmj (1),
.BR yacc (1),
.BR chsm-java (4)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The diagnostics produced by
.B chsm2java
itself are intended to be self-explanatory.
.SH AUTHORS
Paul J. Lucas
.RI < paul@lucasmail.org >
.br
Fabio Riccardi
.RI < fabio.riccardi@mac.com >
.\" vim:set et sw=4 ts=4:
