.\"
.\"	    CHSM Language System
.\"	    chsmj.1 -- CHSM-to-Java compiler driver script manual page
.\"
.\"	    Copyright (C) 2004-2013  Paul J. Lucas & Fabio Riccardi
.\"
.\"	    This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"	    it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"	    the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\"	    (at your option) any later version.
.\"     
.\"	    This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"	    but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"	    MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"	    GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"     
.\"	    You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"	    along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\"	    Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\"
.TH \f3chsmj\f1 1 "January 21, 2010" "CHSM" "CHSM Language System"
.SH NAME
chsmj \- CHSM-to-Java compiler driver script
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B chsmj
[
.I options
]
.I source-file
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B chsmj
is the front-end to the
Concurrent Hierarchical Finite State Machine compiler for Java.
The command uses 
.BR chsm2java (1)
for syntax checking, type checking, intermediate Java code generation
and a Java compiler for code generation.
.PP
For the CHSM source file, \f2source\f(CW.chsmj\f1,
.B chsmj
creates a temporary file,
\f2source\f(CW.java\f1,
containing the generated Java code in the current directory for subsequent
compilation with a Java compiler.
The
.B \-k
(keep) option preserves the file.
.SH OPTIONS
Options begin with a `\f(CW-\f1' for short options.
In addition to the options described below,
.B chsmj
accepts other options via the
.B \-O
option and passes them on to the Java compilation system tools.
See your Java compiler manual page for Java compiler options.
.PP
The following options apply to the CHSM-specific parts of the compilation
process:
.TP 14
.B \-c
Passed to the Java compiler to specify a class-path.
.TP
.B \-E
Run only
.BR chsm2java (1)
on the CHSM source file and send the result to standard output.
.TP
.B \-g
Passed to the Java compiler to produce additional debugging information.
.TP
.B \-k
Leaves the intermediate Java files in the current directory after the
compilation process.
.TP
.B \-n
No-execute mode.
Parse the command-line, but do not execute any commands.
.TP
\f3\-O\f1``,\f2other\f1''
Pass the comma-separated argument string
.RI `` other ''
to the Java compiler to allow implementation-dependent options to be specified.
Note the requirement of the initial comma.
.TP
.B \-s
Passed to the Java compiler to specify a source-path.
.TP
.B \-v
Print the version number of
.BR chsm2java (1)
and exit.
.TP
.B \-V
Print command-lines for
.BR chsm2java (1)
and/or the Java compiler prior to execution.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 14
\f2file\f1\f(CW.chsmj\f1
chsm-Java source file
.TP
\f2file\f1\f(CW.java\f1
intermediate Java definition file
.TP
\f2file\f1\f(CW.class\f1
class file
.TP
.B chsmj
CHSM-to-Java driver shell script
.TP
.B chsm2java
CHSM-to-Java compiler
.TP
\f(CWchsm.jar\f1
CHSM run-time library
.PD
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables are set within the
.B chsmj
driver script,
but can be set in the environment to override various settings:
.TP 14
\f(CWJAVAC\f1
The Java compiler.
.TP
\f(CWJAVA_CLASSPATH_OPT\f1
The option used to specify a class-path to the Java compiler.
.TP
\f(CWJAVAC_SOURCEPATH_OPT\f1
The option used to specify a source-path to the Java compiler.
.TP
\f(CWJAVAC_FLAGS\f1
Additional flags for the Java compiler.
.TP
\f(CWCHSM2JAVA\f1
The CHSM-to-Java compiler.
.TP
\f(CWCHSM2JAVA_FLAGS\f1
CHSM-to-Java compiler flags.
.TP
\f(CWCHSM_JAR\f1
The location of the CHSM jar file (\f(CWchsm.jar\f1).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR chsm2java (1),
.BR javac (1),
.BR chsm-java (4)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The diagnostics produced by
.B chsmj
itself are intended to be self-explanatory.
.SH AUTHORS
Paul J. Lucas
.RI < paul@lucasmail.org >
.br
Fabio Riccardi
.RI < fabio.riccardi@mac.com >
.\" vim:set et sw=4 ts=4:
